Additional 'keycloak' authorization docs (#4743)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/oauth/con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example.adoc

// con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-authorization-services.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_{context}']
= Example authorization rules configuration using Keycloak Authorization Services

> This section provides an end-to-end example of using Keycloak Authorization Services to configure authorization rules for use with `keycloak` authorization.

Reviewer: To increase the readability, use separate paragraphs for 'First...', 'Second', 'Third' and 'Finally'.

First, we use the Admin Console to import a preconfigured realm into a running Keycloak server.
Second, we configure a Kafka cluster to use the preconfigured realm and then deploy the cluster to Kubernetes.
Third, in the Admin Console, we demonstrate the parts of the Keycloak user interface that configure authorization rules.
Finally, we use various Kafka CLIs to show how access to Kafka resources is limited based on the permissions granted to different personal and service accounts.

.Security considerations

This example explains how to use Keycloak Authorization Services with `keycloak` authorization.

> While TLS connectivity is used where necessary, the server certificates are auto-generated, and TLS termination for the Keycloak server is on a reverse proxy server using an Ingress, not on the Keycloak server pod. Take care when creating and reviewing any production configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although TLS connectivity is used where necessary, the server certificates are auto-generated, and TLS termination for the Keycloak server is on a reverse proxy server using an Ingress, not on the Keycloak server pod. Take care when creating and reviewing any production configuration.
```

Keycloak requires Kafka clients to use the same hostname and port as the Kafka brokers. This example assumes that the Ingress hostname is visible to the pods inside the Kubernetes cluster. In your cluster, the Ingress might be visible to external Kafka clients, but not to the pods. Alternatively, you can deploy the Keycloak server to a different Kubernetes cluster than the Cluster Operator.

== Token-based authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

> When using Keycloak with `oauth` authentication, the access token is available, and it is then possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using Keycloak with `oauth` authentication, the access token is available, so it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.
```

> Strimzi Operator comes with support for Keycloak Authorization Services in the form of `keycloak` authorization, which allows using Keycloak to manage fine grained permissions to Kafka resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strimzi provides support for Keycloak Authorization Services in the form of `keycloak` authorization, which allows you to use Keycloak to manage fine grained permissions to Kafka resources.
```

When using `keycloak` authorization, a custom authorizer is configured on the Kafka broker that uses Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.
The list of grants (permissions) is fetched as the first action after an authenticated session is established by the Kafka client, and then regularly refreshed in the background.
Grants are cached and enforced locally on the Kafka broker for each user session to provide fast authorization decisions. Because they are periodically refreshed, any changes to the grants on the Keycloak server are detected and enforced.

== Provisioning the Keycloak server

Install the Keycloak server using the Keycloak Operator as described in {keycloak-server-install-doc} in the Keycloak documentation.

== Uploading the demo realm

> When a Keycloak instance is running, upload the example realm to Keycloak using the Admin Console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a Keycloak instance is running, upload the example realm to Keycloak using the Admin Console.
```

You can then obtain the clear text password by running:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
SECRET_NAME=credential-keycloak
kubectl get -n $NS secret $SECRET_NAME -o yaml | grep PASSWORD | awk '{print $2}' | base64 -D
----

Log in to the Admin Console with the username `admin` and the password you obtained earlier. You must use `https://HOST` to access the Kubernetes ingress.

Once logged in, click *Add Realm* to import the example realm. Select the `$EXAMPLES_DIR/security/keycloak-authorization/kafka-authz-realm.json` file from your disk, and then click *Create*.

You should now have `kafka-authz` as your current realm in the Admin Console.

== Deploying the minimal Kafka cluster

We assume that the Strimzi Cluster Operator has already been installed on the Kubernetes  cluster.

Our Kafka cluster has to be properly configured with authentication and authorization settings to connect to our Keycloak instance.

Assuming the Keycloak Operator was used to install the Keycloak server instance, and that `sso` namespace was used, we can determine the external hostname:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
NS=sso
kubectl get ingress keycloak -n $NS
----

> Kubernetes ingress uses a secure connection (https) which means that we need to prepare a certificate truststore to make it possible for Kafka brokers to speak to the Keycloak server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes ingress uses a secure connection (HTTPS), which means that we need to prepare a certificate truststore to make it possible for Kafka brokers to communicate with the Keycloak server.
```

[source,shell]
----
SSO_HOST=<sso_hostname>
SSO_HOST_PORT=$SSO_HOST:443
STOREPASS=storepass

echo "Q" | openssl s_client -showcerts -connect $SSO_HOST_PORT 2>/dev/null | awk ' /BEGIN CERTIFICATE/,/END CERTIFICATE/ { print $0 } ' > /tmp/sso.crt
----

Now we need to deploy the certificate to Kubernetes as a secret:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
kubectl create secret generic oauth-server-cert --from-file=/tmp/sso.crt -n $NS
----

Set the hostname as an ENV var before deploying the prepared `Kafka` custom resource for the example:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
SSO_HOST=&lt;sso_hostname&gt;
EXAMPLES_DIR=examples
cat $EXAMPLES_DIR/security/keycloak-authorization/kafka-ephemeral-oauth-single-keycloak-authz.yaml | sed -E 's#\${SSO_HOST}'"#$SSO_HOST#" | kubectl create -n $NS -f -
----

== Using the Keycloak Admin Console to configure authorization

> When logging into the Admin Console, the default view displays the *Master* realm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After logging into the Admin Console, the default view displays the *Master* realm.
```

> For this example, locate and select the `kafka-authz` realm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, locate and select the example `kafka-authz` realm that you uploaded earlier.
```

Under *Groups*, you can view user groups and set user permissions.
Groups are sets of users with a name assigned. Typically, they are used to compartmentalize users into geographical, organizational or departmental units.

In Keycloak, groups can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.
You can make a user a member of a group through a custom LDAP server admin user interface, for example, to grant permissions on Kafka resources.

Under *Users*, you can view all defined users. For this example, `alice` and `bob` are defined. `alice` is a member of the `ClusterManager Group`, and `bob` is a member of `ClusterManager-my-cluster Group`.
In Keycloak, users can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.

Under *Roles*, you can view the realm roles to mark users or clients as having some permissions.
Roles are a concept analogous to groups. They are usually used to _tag_ users with organizational roles and have the requisite permissions.
Roles cannot be stored in an LDAP identity provider.
If LDAP is a requirement, you can use groups instead, and add Keycloak roles to the groups so that when users are assigned a group they also get a corresponding role.

> Under *Clients*, you can view the additional client configurations. For this example,  `kafka`, `kafka-cli`, `team-a-client`, `team-b-client` are configured.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under *Clients*, you can view the additional client configurations. For this example,  `kafka`, `kafka-cli`, `team-a-client`, and `team-b-client` are configured.
```

You can then obtain the clear text password by running:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
SECRET_NAME=credential-keycloak
kubectl get -n $NS secret $SECRET_NAME -o yaml | grep PASSWORD | awk '{print $2}' | base64 -D
----

Log in to the Admin Console with the username `admin` and the password you obtained earlier. You must use `https://HOST` to access the Kubernetes ingress.

When you are logged in, click *Add Realm* to import the example realm.

Select the `$EXAMPLES_DIR/security/keycloak-authorization/kafka-authz-realm.json` file from your disk, and then click *Create*.

You should now have `kafka-authz` as your current realm in the Admin Console.

== Deploying the minimal Kafka cluster

We assume that the Strimzi Cluster Operator has already been installed on the Kubernetes  cluster.

Our Kafka cluster has to be properly configured with authentication and authorization settings to connect to our Keycloak instance.

Assuming the Keycloak Operator was used to install the Keycloak server instance, and that `sso` namespace was used, we can determine the external hostname:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
NS=sso

> kubectl get ingress keycloak -n $NS

Reviewer 2: There seems to be a lot of inconsistency in the way you use the `$NS`: 
* In a lot of examples, you define it and use it
* In other, you just use it without defining it

I wonder if we can do it just one way. Not a big deal, you can keep it as it is if you see some structure in it. It is just something I noticed.

// con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-authorization-services.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_{context}']
= Example authorization rules configuration using Keycloak Authorization Services

> This is an end-to-end example of using Keycloak Authorization Services to configure authorization rules for use with `keycloak` authorization in Strimzi Operator.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a numbered list to outline the order of the steps described in this example? @laidan6000 - what do you think, Daniel?

> This is an end-to-end example of using Keycloak Authorization Services to configure authorization rules for use with `keycloak` authorization in Strimzi Operator.

Reviewer: I think that would help readers to navigate through the example. I think you can link to the auto-generated anchors for each heading. For more information, see https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/macros/xref/#anchors

<hr>

The example consists of the following procedures:

1. Provision the Keycloak server
2. Upload the demo realm
3. Deploy the minimal Kafka cluster
4. Use the Keycloak Admin Console to configure authorization
5. Define Authorization Services for access control
6. Target permissions using group or role policies
7. Authorization in action using CLI clients

We then return to the Keycloak Admin Console and demonstrate the sections of the user interface where authorization rules are configured.
We use Kafka CLI client tools with different personal and service accounts to demonstrate limited access based on the permissions granted to different accounts.

[CAUTION]
====
This example is focused on explaining how to use Keycloak Authorization Services.
While TLS connectivity is used where necessary, the server certificates are autogenerated, and TLS termination for Keycloak server is on a reverse proxy server using an ingress, not on Keycloak server pod. Additional care should be taken and review done when creating the production configuration.
Also note, that Keycloak requires that Kafka clients use the exact same hostname and port as the Kafka brokers. This example assumes that the ingress hostname is visible to pods inside the Kubernetes cluster, which may not be the case on your Kubernetes cluster (for example, it may be visible to Kafka clients outside the Kubernetes cluster, but not from the pods inside the cluster). Alternatively, you can deploy Keycloak server to a different Kubernetes cluster than the Strimzi Operator.
====

> == Token-based authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

Reviewer: Happy to leave the information here. We can review this section for potential duplicate information later.

Strimzi Operator comes with support for Keycloak Authorization Services in the form of `keycloak` authorization, which allows using Keycloak to manage fine grained permissions to Kafka resources.

When using `keycloak` authorization, a custom authorizer is configured on the Kafka broker that uses Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.
The list of grants (permissions) is fetched as the first action after an authenticated session is established by the Kafka client, and then regularly refreshed in the background.
Grants are cached and enforced locally on the Kafka broker for each user session to provide fast authorization decisions. Because they are periodically refreshed, any changes to the grants on the Keycloak server are detected and enforced.

== Provisioning the Keycloak server

The easiest way to install the Keycloak server is to use the Keycloak Operator. Follow the instructions in {keycloak-server-install-doc}.

== Uploading the demo realm

Once a Keycloak instance is running, we can upload the example realm by using the Keycloak Admin Console

> 

Author: Can you be more specific, which part seems complicated? We can not assume people always use the Keycloak Operator. If anything the primary instruction is without an operator, and if using the operator your life is a bit easier.

> 

Reviewer: OK, I'm happy to leave the mentions of the alternative installation method (not using the Keycloak Operator).

The following instructions can be used regardless of how your Keycloak instance was provisioned. If Keycloak Operator was used, you can follow the steps to obtain the necessary information to continue, otherwise you may have to discover the necessary information for the next steps yourself.

> 

Author: @laidan6000 Just a numbered list? How do you fit all the text and shell script into a numbered bullet point?

> 

Reviewer: Happy to omit the step numbers in this case.

First, determine the external hostname to access the Admin Console.

> For example, if the Keycloak Operator was used to install Keycloak server in namespace called `sso`, you can run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if the Keycloak Operator installed the Keycloak server in the `sso` namespace, run the following command:
```

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
NS=sso
kubectl get ingress keycloak -n $NS
----

> Second, determine the password for the admin user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, get the password for the admin user.
```

If you used Keycloak Operator, the password is stored as a secret, so you first have to identify the name of the secret. You can inspect the yaml for the Keycloak instance. For example:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
kubectl get -n $NS pod keycloak-0 -o yaml | less
----

> Search for `KEYCLOAK_PASSWORD`, and note the `secretKeyRef`.`name`. It is usually something like `credential-keycloak`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Search for `KEYCLOAK_PASSWORD` and note the `secretKeyRef`.`name` (usually `credential-keycloak` or similar).
```

You can then obtain the clear text password by running:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
SECRET_NAME=credential-keycloak
kubectl get -n $NS secret $SECRET_NAME -o yaml | grep PASSWORD | awk '{print $2}' | base64 -D
----

> Now, login to the Admin Console (you have to use https://HOST for Kubernetes ingress) using `admin` as the username, and the revealed password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in to the Admin Console with the username `admin` and the password you obtained earlier. You must use `https://HOST` to access the Kubernetes ingress.
```

> 

Reviewer: I think line 71 should be two separate steps.

Author: @laidan6000 Can you be more specific which line? Line 71 seems to be an empty line.

Reviewer: Sorry, line 69.

When you are logged in, click *Add Realm* to import the example realm.

Select the `$EXAMPLES_DIR/security/keycloak-authorization/kafka-authz-realm.json` file from your disk, and then click *Create*.

> Once logged in, use `Add Realm` to import the example realm. Select `$EXAMPLES_DIR/security/keycloak-authorization/kafka-authz-realm.json` file from your disk, and click `Create`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once logged in, click *Add Realm* to import the example realm. Select the `$EXAMPLES_DIR/security/keycloak-authorization/kafka-authz-realm.json` file from your disk, and then click *Create*.
```

You should now have `kafka-authz` as your current realm in the Admin Console.

== Deploying the minimal Kafka cluster

> We assume that the Strimzi Cluster Operator has already been installed on the Kubernetes  cluster.

Reviewer: Please format these as a list of prerequsites.

Author: @laidan6000 Can you be more specific? Ideally a comment with a suggestion I can merge?

Reviewer: In the interests of time, please leave this unchanged. This is an example, so perhaps we don't need to use a list of prerequisites, like we do in procedures throughout the documentation.

Our Kafka cluster has to be properly configured with authentication and authorization settings to connect to our Keycloak instance.

> Assuming the Keycloak Operator was used to install the Keycloak server instance, and that `sso` namespace was used, we can determine the external hostname:

Reviewer: Again, it's simpler to ignore the non-Operator method.

Author: See above for the rationoale.

----

If your default namespace is not `myproject` (for example, `default`), use the following to deploy Keycloak:
Now, login to the Admin Console (you have to use https://HOST for Kubernetes ingress) using `admin` as the username, and the revealed password.

Once logged in, use `Add Realm` to import the example realm. Select `$EXAMPLES_DIR/security/keycloak-authorization/kafka-authz-realm.json` file from your disk, and click `Create`.

You should now have `kafka-authz` as your current realm in the Admin Console.

== Deploying the minimal Kafka cluster

[source,yaml]
We assume that the Strimzi Cluster Operator has already been installed on the Kubernetes  cluster.

Our Kafka cluster has to be properly configured with authentication and authorization settings to connect to our Keycloak instance.

Assuming the Keycloak Operator was used to install the Keycloak server instance, and that `sso` namespace was used, we can determine the external hostname:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
----
curl -s $ROOT/examples/kubernetes/keycloak-postgres.yaml | sed -e "s#myproject#default#" | kubectl apply -f -
NS=sso
kubectl get ingress keycloak -n $NS
----

> .Deploy the minimal Kafka cluster

Reviewer: Please format as a numbered list.

Reviewer: Ignore

== Using the Keycloak Admin Console to configure authorization

When logging into the Admin Console, the default view displays the *Master* realm.

> For this example we are interested in the `kafka-authz` realm, which you can select in the upper left corner.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this example, locate and select the `kafka-authz` realm.
```

> Initially, the *Realm Settings* section is selected, but you can navigate to  *Groups*, *Roles*, *Clients* and *Users*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

> Under *Groups*, you can view groups to mark users as having some permissions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From *Groups*, you can view user groups and set user permissions.
```

Groups are sets of users with a name assigned. Typically, they are used to compartmentalize users into geographical, organizational or departmental units.

In Keycloak, groups can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.

> That makes it possible to make a user a member of a group through a custom LDAP server admin user interface, for example, to grant them some permissions on Kafka resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can make a user a member of a group through a custom LDAP server admin user interface, for example, to grant permissions on Kafka resources.
```

[id='con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_{context}']

> = Example authorization rules configuration using Authorization Services

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
= Example authorization rules configuration using Keycloak Authorization Services
```

> If LDAP is a requirement, you can use groups instead, and add Keycloak roles to the groups so that when users are assigned a group, they also get a corresponding role.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If LDAP is a requirement, you can use groups instead, and add Keycloak roles to the groups so that when users are assigned a group they also get a corresponding role.
```

> Under *Clients*, you can view the additional client configurations. For this example,  `kafka`, `kafka-cli`, `team-a-client`, `team-b-client` are configured.

Reviewer 3: To scan easily, maybe we can list all the example configs we can see in the console in a bulleted list? (A table of all the configs would work too.)

Author: This is not an exhaustive list, it's meant to be informational, not a matrix of choices.

As a consequence, if you want to target permissions to microservices using service accounts, you cannot use group policies, and should instead use role policies.
Conversely, if you want to limit certain permissions only to regular user accounts where authentication with username and password is required, you can achieve that as a side effect of using the group policies, rather than the role policies.
That is what is used for permissions that start with `ClusterManager`.

> Performing cluster management is usually done interactively - in person - using CLI tools.

Reviewer: What does in person mean?

> It makes sense to require the user to log in, before using the resulting access token to authenticate to the Kafka broker.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It makes sense to require the user to log in before using the resulting access token to authenticate to the Kafka broker.
```

In this case, the access token represents the specific user, rather than the client application.

== Authorization in action using CLI clients

> Make sure that authorization rules have been properly imported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Make sure that authorization rules have been properly imported to the Admin Console.
```

> From *menu:Clients[kafka>Authorization>Settings]* make sure that *Decision Strategy* is set to *Affirmative*, and NOT to *Unanimous*.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
From *menu:Clients[kafka>Authorization>Settings]* *Decision Strategy* must be set to *Affirmative*, and NOT to *Unanimous*.
```

> Navigate to *Resources*, *Authorization claims*, *Policies*, and *Permissions* tabs to make sure they contain the content.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Navigate the *Resources*, *Authorization claims*, *Policies*, and *Permissions* tabs to make sure they contain the content.
```

Reviewer 3: Do we need to say any more on the expected content here?

STOREPASS=storepass

echo "Q" | openssl s_client -showcerts -connect $KAFKA_HOST_PORT 2>/dev/null | awk ' /BEGIN CERTIFICATE/,/END CERTIFICATE/ { print $0 } ' > /tmp/my-cluster-kafka.crt

keytool -keystore /tmp/truststore.p12 -storetype pkcs12 -alias my-cluster-kafka -storepass $STOREPASS -import -file /tmp/my-cluster-kafka.crt -noprompt
----

Finally, we prepare the Kafka Client configuration parameters:

[source,shell]
----
SSO_HOST=<sso_hostname>

cat > /tmp/team-a-client.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_SSL
ssl.truststore.location=/tmp/truststore.p12
ssl.truststore.password=$STOREPASS
ssl.truststore.type=PKCS12
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.client.id="team-a-client" \
  oauth.client.secret="team-a-client-secret" \
  oauth.ssl.truststore.location="/tmp/truststore.p12" \
  oauth.ssl.truststore.password="$STOREPASS" \
  oauth.ssl.truststore.type="PKCS12" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="https://$SSO_HOST/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
----

> The roles assigned to a client, such as the `Dev Team A` realm role assigned to the `team-a-client` service account, are presented on the *Service Account Roles* tab for *Clients* in the Admin Console .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The roles assigned to a client, such as the `Dev Team A` realm role assigned to the `team-a-client` service account, are presented on the *Service Account Roles* tab for *Clients* in the Admin Console.
```

We can use this configuration from the Kafka CLI to produce and consume messages, and perform other administration tasks.

.Producing messages with authorized access

The `team-a-client` configuration is used to produce messages to topics that start with `a_` or `x_`.

> The first command will result in error as it tries to write to topic `my-topic`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first command will result in an error as it tries to write to topic `my-topic`:
```

kubectl attach -ti kafka-cli
----

To produce messages as client `team-a-client`, we prepare a Kafka client configuration file.

> We use SASL/OAUTHBEARER mechanism with Client ID and Client Secret which means the client will first connect to Keycloak server to obtain an access token. Then it will connect to the Kafka broker and use the obtained access token to authenticate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We use the SASL/OAUTHBEARER mechanism with a Client ID and Client Secret, which means the client first connects to the Keycloak server to obtain an access token. The client then connects to the Kafka broker and uses the obtained access token to authenticate.
```

We need to prepare and configure the truststore for TLS connections to work.

First, we use the external hostname exposing the Keycloak to obtain the certificate.

[source,shell]
----
SSO_HOST=<sso_hostname>
SSO_HOST_PORT=$SSO_HOST:443
STOREPASS=storepass

echo "Q" | openssl s_client -showcerts -connect $SSO_HOST_PORT 2>/dev/null | awk ' /BEGIN CERTIFICATE/,/END CERTIFICATE/ { print $0 } ' > /tmp/sso.crt

keytool -keystore /tmp/truststore.p12 -storetype pkcs12 -alias sso -storepass $STOREPASS -import -file /tmp/sso.crt -noprompt
----

Then, we add to the same truststore the certificate for the Kafka broker, which we obtain using the `my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap` as a hostname and `tls` listener port (9093):

[source,shell]
----
KAFKA_HOST_PORT=my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093
STOREPASS=storepass

echo "Q" | openssl s_client -showcerts -connect $KAFKA_HOST_PORT 2>/dev/null | awk ' /BEGIN CERTIFICATE/,/END CERTIFICATE/ { print $0 } ' > /tmp/my-cluster-kafka.crt

keytool -keystore /tmp/truststore.p12 -storetype pkcs12 -alias my-cluster-kafka -storepass $STOREPASS -import -file /tmp/my-cluster-kafka.crt -noprompt
----

> Finally, let's prepare the Kafka Client configuration parameters:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, we prepare the Kafka Client configuration parameters:
```

[source,shell]
----
SSO_HOST=<sso_hostname>

cat > /tmp/team-a-client.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_SSL
ssl.truststore.location=/tmp/truststore.p12
ssl.truststore.password=$STOREPASS
ssl.truststore.type=PKCS12
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.client.id="team-a-client" \
  oauth.client.secret="team-a-client-secret" \
  oauth.ssl.truststore.location="/tmp/truststore.p12" \
  oauth.ssl.truststore.password="$STOREPASS" \
  oauth.ssl.truststore.type="PKCS12" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="https://$SSO_HOST/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
----

> The roles assigned to a client, such as the `Dev Team A` realm role assigned to the `team-a-client` service account, are presented in Keycloak Admin Console on the *Service Account Roles* tab of *Clients* section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The roles assigned to a client, such as the `Dev Team A` realm role assigned to the `team-a-client` service account, are presented on the *Service Account Roles* tab for *Clients* in the Admin Console .
```

We can use this configuration from the Kafka CLI to produce and consume messages, and perform other administration tasks.

.Producing messages with authorized access

The `team-a-client` configuration is used to produce messages to topics that start with `a_` or `x_`.

> The next command will result in error due to trying to write to topic `my-topic`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first command produces an error as it tries to write to topic `my-topic`:
```

You can see the Kafka container log by running:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
kubectl logs my-cluster-kafka-0 -f -n $NS

.Consuming messages with authorized access

> The `team-a-client` configuration can be used to consume messages from topic `a_messages`, but the next command will produce an error:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` configuration can be used to consume messages from topic `a_messages`. However, the following command will produce an error:
```

You can see the Kafka container log by running:

[source,shell,subs="attributes"]
kubectl logs my-cluster-kafka-0 -f -n $NS

.Consuming messages with authorized access

> The `team-a-client` configuration can be used to consume messages from topic `a_messages`, but the next command will result in error:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` configuration can be used to consume messages from topic `a_messages`, but the next command will produce an error:
```

[source,shell,subs=+quotes]
----
bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093 --topic a_messages \
  --from-beginning --consumer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
----

An error is returned as the `Dev Team A` role for `team-a-client` only has access to consumer groups that have names starting with `a_`.

> The custom consumer group has to be specified which the `team-a-client` is permitted to use:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` properties are updated to specify the custom consumer group it is permitted to use:
```

.Administering Kafka with authorized access

> The `team-a-client` is an account without any cluster-level access, but can still be used with some administrative operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `team-a-client` is an account without any cluster-level access, but it can be used with some administrative operations.
```

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093 --topic x_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
Message 1
----

A `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]` error is returned again. Though `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, it does not have a permission to create a topic if it does not yet exist.

> Before `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, a admin _power user_ must create it with the correct configuration, such as the number of partitions and replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, an admin _power user_ must create it with the correct configuration, such as the number of partitions and replicas.
```

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093 --topic x_messages \
  --producer.config /tmp/team-a-client.properties
Message 1
----

A `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]` error is returned again. Though `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, it does not have a permission to create a topic if it does not yet exist.

Before `team-a-client` can write to the `x_messages` topic, a admin _power user_ must create it with the correct configuration, such as the number of partitions and replicas.

.Managing Kafka with an authorized admin

Admin user `alice` is created in Keycloak with full access to manage everything on any Kafka cluster.

> We can authenticate as `alice` by using `curl` and perform password grant authentication to obtain a refresh token which we can then use to configure the Kafka client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can authenticate as `alice` by using `curl` and performing a password grant authentication to obtain a refresh token, which we can then use to configure the Kafka client.
```

[source,shell]
----
USERNAME=alice
PASSWORD=alice-password

GRANT_RESPONSE=$(curl -X POST "https://$SSO_HOST/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" -H 'Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded' -d "grant_type=password&username=$USERNAME&password=$PASSWORD&client_id=kafka-cli&scope=offline_access" -s -k)

REFRESH_TOKEN=$(echo $GRANT_RESPONSE | awk -F "refresh_token\":\"" '{printf $2}' | awk -F "\"" '{printf $1}')
----

The refresh token in this case is an offline token which is a long-lived refresh token that does not expire.

> A configuration file for `alice` looks like the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The configuration file for `alice`:
```

We can use this because we authenticate with a token directly. In this case, the refresh token requests an access token behind the scenes, which is then sent to the Kafka broker for authentication. The refresh token has already been authenticated.

User `alice` has permission to create the `x_messages` topic:

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093 --command-config /tmp/alice.properties \
  --topic x_messages --create --replication-factor 1 --partitions 1
----

> User `alice` can list all the topic, whereas `team-a-client` and `team-b-client` can only list topics they have access to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User `alice` can list all the topics, whereas `team-a-client` and `team-b-client` can only list topics they have access to:
```

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093 --command-config /tmp/alice.properties --list
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093 --command-config /tmp/team-a-client.properties --list
bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9093 --command-config /tmp/team-b-client.properties --list
----

> The `Dev Team A`, and `Dev Team B` roles both have `Describe` permission on topics that start with `x_`, but they cannot see the other team's topics as they do not have `Describe` permissions on them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Dev Team A` and `Dev Team B` roles both have `Describe` permission on topics that start with `x_`, but they cannot see the other team's topics because they do not have `Describe` permissions on them.
```
